# ClimaticAnalogs

We used the sigma dissimilarity approach of Mahony et al. (2017) to quantify the dissimilarity in climate between the projected conditions of target locations (decade 2090-2100) and their closest analog of current conditions (decades 2010-2020). The approach builds upon the multivariate standardized Euclidean distance (SED) metric (Williams et al., 2007; Veloz et al., 2012), which normalizes climate variables based on the local intra-annual climate variability (ICV), but with two modifications: (i) the adaptation of SED to Mahalanobis distance and (ii) the interpretation of climate distances as percentiles of the chi distribution. The use of Mahalanobis distance scales variables relative to ICV and removes variance inflation due to correlations, while the statistical interpretation based on the chi distribution accounts for the effect of dimensionality, thus enabling meaningful comparisons between analyses using different numbers of input variables (Lotterhos et al., 2021; King et al., 2023).

Climate variables were generated with the Bio-ORACLE computational pipelines (Assis et al., 2018) at the global scale (0.25º resolution), per year, for the current baseline conditions (period 2010 to 2020) and the projected conditions of three Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) scenarios of future change (period 2090 to 2100): (1) SSP1-1.9, the “sustainability” scenario following the Paris Agreement expectations of reduced carbon emissions, (2) SSP3-7.0, the “regional rivalry” scenario representing medium-to-high carbon emissions, and (3) SSP5-8.5 scenario, the “fossil-fueled development” scenario of higher carbon emissions and challenges to mitigation. Biologically meaningful variables of sea temperature, dissolved oxygen, primary productivity of phytoplankton and pH were generated. The data used for current conditions resulted from Copernicus Marine Service, while the data for the SSP scenarios resulted from the ensemble (average; Assis et al., 2018) of several general atmosphere-ocean circulation models (ACCESS-ESM1-5, CanESM5, CESM2-WACCM, CNRM-ESM2-1, GFDL-ESM4, GISS-E2-1-G, IPSL-CM6A-LR, MIROC-ES2L, MPI-ESM1-2-LR, MRI-ESM2-0, UKESM1-0-LL) made available by the 6th version of Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP).

We determined sigma dissimilarity per species as detailed by Mahony et al. (2017). First, the climate variables of both baseline and projected periods were standardized as anomalies z-scores, by subtracting, at the cell level, the mean ICV of the baseline data (2010-2020) and subsequently dividing by the standard deviation of the ICV of the baseline data (Wilks et al., 2006). Second, a principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the standardized baseline data, with the number of components kept explaining, at least, 99% of data variability. The PCA was then used to transform both standardized baseline and projected data. Third, the Mahalanobis distance was determined between each ocean cell of the transformed projected climate data and its closest analog (a.k.a., climate analog) of the pool of cells of the transformed baseline climate data comprised within the range map of the species of interest (i.e., climate novelty; Lotterhos et al., 2021). This step allowed making a straightforward relationship between the multivariate climate distance of target locations and the climatic niche of species, with closest climate analogs representing ocean cells in the global baseline data whose climate resembles that of the projected climate at target locations. Lastly, sigma dissimilarity, a statistical metric of departure from baseline climates, was determined by converting Mahalanobis distances using the Chi-distribution. Following Mahony et al. (2017), we interpreted sigma dissimilarity between 2 and 4 as moderate degree of dissimilar climates (the 95th percentile of the baseline climate) and above 4 as extreme degree of dissimilar climates (the 99.994th percentile of the baseline climate). 

## Data availability statement
Climate data are openly provided by the E.U. Copernicus Marine Service at https://resources.marine.copernicus.eu/products and the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (Phase 6) at https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6/. Species’ range maps are openly available from Aquamaps at https://www.aquamaps.org.


## Authors

* **Jorge Assis** @ [Biodiversity Data Science](https://www.biodiversitydatascience.com)

## License

Except where otherwise noted, the content on this repository is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
